ADVENTURES FOR THE CITIES

Here are some basic plots for city adven¬tures which can be used in almost any fan¬tasy role-playing game system.
Looks Can Be Deceiving: The most powerful government official in town is act¬ing strangely. He's implementing odd and unreasonable taxes and planning to start programs which will benefit himself, but will do nothing to better the city or its peo¬ple. Actually, the official is not himself. He has been replaced by a shapechanging mon¬ster that is having fun trying its hand at poli¬tics. The player characters will have to catch the shapechanger and rescue the real politician.
Pickpocket Peddlers: A gang of thieves are masquerading as street ped¬dlers. The owner of a trinket shop provides the thieves with goods to sell on the street, and the thieves pick the pockets of the peo¬ple who look over their wares. The trinket shop owner gets a percentage of the stolen money. The player characters hear rumors about a gang of pickpockets operating in the merchants quarter and are asked to find the thieves and put a stop to their activities.
Feathering His Nest: A merchant has purchased a cockatrice from a band of adventurers and is keeping the thing caged up in his basement. The merchant is using the monster to get rich: he very carefully gathers the beasts' feathers and uses them to turn animals into "amazingly lifelike statues" which he sells to the public. Unfor¬tunately for the fraud, a few of the neigh¬bors have begun to miss their pets. A wealthy pet owner hires the PCs to find her favorite dog, and the PCs must ultimately deal with the merchant and his monster.
A Good Right Arm: A man new to town (a giant polymorphed to human form) has been visiting the local taverns and winning money from the locals in arm-wrestling contests. The citywide arm-wrestling cham¬pionship is coming up next week, and a few of the locals look to the PCs to find a champi¬on who can best the newcomer.
There Is No Honor: Horton, a thief who has served his time for a series of burglaries he committed 10 years ago, is finally free on parole and intends to lead an honest life from now on. But the thieves guild he used to belong to doesn't like his change in careers. Several members of the guild have 
begun a series of burglaries—using the same method of operation Horton was known for. Horton is arrested for the crimes, and it is up to the PCs to prove his innocence and bring the real culprits to jus¬tice.
Protection Racket: A group of hood¬lums have enlisted the aid of a local cleric of non-good alignment to help them with a protection racket. The cleric controls a small group of undead, which he and the hoodlums take to merchants' homes after dark. The hoodlums demand that the mer¬chants pay protection money, or their busi¬nesses will be ruined by the undead. Most of the merchants agree to the mob's terms. However, one merchant won't put up with the threats and contacts a group of low- level adventurers to handle the threat.
Defacing The Face: A statue has been made to honor the town's leading official, and it has been placed in the center of the park. The day after the dedication ceremo¬ny, the statue's head is missing. It is found a day later, high up in the branches of a large tree in the park. The statue is repaired, only to have it covered the next day with bright red paint, and the next day adorned with leaves and pinecones. The town official hires the player characters to catch the per¬son responsible for defacing the statue. The problem is, no one person or group of per¬sons is responsible. A thieves guild, a group of teenagers, three elderly men who don't like the official, a whimsical leprechaun, and a group of drunks from the tavern across from the park are all responsible for the assorted acts, and the player characters will have their hands full catching all the culprits.
Election Hysteria: The mayor is a very popular man who has been very good for the city. It is certain he will win the next election. However, the mayor's opponent has a few mages working for him, who are charming people to vote for their candidate. The mayor loses by an incredible margin and asks the player characters to look into the voting process.
Monsters in the Street: A bum who
"acquired" a pouch filled with a few coins and a beautiful gem from a dead man in an alley has actually acquired a jewel of attacks (or a similar magic item which draws mon¬sters and always returns to its owner). The 
bum sold the gem to a jewelry shop, which during the night was attacked by a monster. The next morning the gem appeared back in the bum's pouch. The bum believes the pouch is magical and will produce a gem every day. He continues to sell a gem each day to a jeweler, pawnbroker, or some hap¬less gent he meets on the street. The city begins to be plagued by monsters, and the player characters are called in to find a way to keep the monsters out of town.
The Water Doesn't Work: A few
unscrupulous adventurers with potions of animal control have instructed several giant beavers to dam up the river that flows through town. The adventurers are holding the water for ransom, threatening to keep the city dry if it doesn't come up with 5,000 gp. The player characters are asked to find a way to turn the water back on.
There Goes the Neighborhood: A
wealthy landowner anticipates the city's business district growing and wants to acquire land next to the business district so he can cash in on the expansion. To accom¬plish this, he has hired a few down-on-their- luck fighters to bully the locals into selling their property. He has set fire to a few homes —the owners of which would not sell—and has had the fighters threaten that there will be more fires. A few businessmen have noticed that several locals are moving from the area and that the land is being bought up. They ask the player characters to investigate.
Rats, Rats, Rats: A pawn shop owner unwittingly acquired pipes of the sewers and has been playing them to pass the time when no customers are around. This has brought hundreds upon hundreds of rats into the city, and the player characters are hired to exterminate them.
