The Military
The size of a militia will depend on many factors, including the size of the population, the makeup of the community's leaders, and the community's stance with surrounding 
villages, towns, and cities. For example, a city that has an uneasy relationship with its neighbors probably would have a large mili¬tia or more than one military force. A town whose ruler is frightened of potential threats from the outside also likely would have a comparatively large force. However, a town that has good relations with its neighbors, has never been invaded, and has a confident leader might have just a small militia.
Hamlets and small villages might have no protection other than the citizens them¬selves (principally, but perhaps not exclu¬sively, the healthy adult males), who band together when a threat is posed. These citi¬zens might also serve as the community's watch, taking turns patrolling the area. In addition, perhaps there is a community plan in which all the men rally to the commu¬nity's defense if an alarm is sounded. How¬ever, it is also possible that a hamlet or small village will have a fairly well organized defense force, especially if the community has enemies.
Larger villages, towns, and cities should have better defenses because more people live there, there are more merchants who demand protection, and there are public buildings which officials will demand be defended. One of the major reasons people live in communities is for protection. And the larger the community, the more defens¬es and the larger the militia it will have. However, size of the militia is again depen¬dent on some of the factors mentioned above, such as the confidence level of the community officials. Villages, towns, and cities also could have walls, a moat, magic, or perhaps a friendly creature or monster to help defend them.
You must select the added defenses for your communities in part based on each community's location. For example, a town on an arid plain is not likely to be protected by a moat (unless there is some fantastic reason for the water not evaporating). A frigid northern village is not going to be pro¬tected by a friendly monster that is native to warm climes. And player characters are not likely to see a village in the swamp sur¬rounded by a thick stone wall—unless the ground in that part of the swamp is unusu¬ally solid (thanks to magic?). A little bit of common sense will help you develop your communities' defenses.
Following is a table you can consult for ideas on how a community might be defend¬ed. It also can be used to randomly generate
defenses. After the table are explanations of the types of defenses and guidelines for the
size of militias.	
d100 roll	Type(s) of Defense
01-07	None
08-34	S only
35	S, M
36-50	S, CW
51	S, CW, M
52-59	S, W
60	S, W, M
61-71	S, W, CW
72	S, W, CW, M
73-75	F M only
76	FM, M
77-79	FM, CW
80	FM, CW, M
81-82	FM, CW, W
83	FM, W, CW, M
84-85	AP only
86	AP, M
87-88	AP, S
89	AP, S, M
90-92	AP, S, CW
93	AP, S, CW, M
94-96	AP, C, CW, W
97	AP, S, CW, W, M
98-99	AP, S, FM, CW, W
00	AP, S, FM, CW, W, M

 
S = Sentries/Guards/Militia: The most common form of defense a community will have is men trained to defend the public. From a hamlet, where a few residents act as sentries and volunteer defenders, to a large city with several guard forces, these men will be the first to combat whatever problems arise. There should be a base of 1 guard per 150 residents, with a minimum of 3 guards. If the community is on peaceful terms with its neighbors and has no known enemies, there will be 1 guard per 200 residents, with a mini¬mum of 3 guards. If, however, the community is on uneasy terms with its neighbors, or has unrest within its own boundaries, there will be 1 guard per 100 residents, with a minimum of 5 guards.
Communities with less than 5,000 resi¬dents are not likely to have an army (militia), unless the community has known enemies or feels threatened. In an army, there should be a base of 25 soldiers per 1,000 res¬idents. This number will double, triple, or quadruple, depending on the severity of the threat posed against the community. A standing army is responsible for patrolling a community's boundaries and the surround¬ing lands. You must also consider the makeup of the forces. A village could have a guard force made up of 0-level humans, while a large town might have more than one force, each of which consists of personnel ranging from 0-level humans through 5th level fighters, with the higher-level NPCs having com¬manding roles. The larger a community is, the better chance that it will have relatively high-level characters in its militia.
You should consider specifically creating the NPCs who are in leading roles in a city's militia or guard force, since it is likely that player characters will interact with them. Rowdy PCs unwinding in a tavern after a long adventure could find themselves up against the leader of the guards. Or, PCs wanting to find work between adventures might have to deal with some of the higher- ups in the community's army.
CW = City Wall: This is one of the best defenses a city can create. A tall, sturdy wall made of brick, stone, or clay can serve a variety of purposes. Sentries standing on parapets along the wall can regulate who enters and leaves the city; can get a good view of the surrounding area and spot potential attackers at a distance; and can even survey the city, keeping an eye out for lawbreakers, fires, and trouble. In times of attack, guards and members of the city's militia can stand along the wall, raining arrows, spears, and oil on the assailants and
 
using the wall for cover.
How wealthy a community is and what kind of labor force it has will help deter¬mine how much the wall encompasses. For example, a wealthy community with a large work force could have a wall that circles the entire city. Other cities might only have a wall around a portion of the city, such as where the wealthy) merchants, city offi¬cials, and public buildings are located. A city that is small in area is likely to have more of its territory protected by walls than a city whose territory is sprawling and perhaps oddly shaped (it's easier to build straight walls than it is to make curved ones, or ones with lots of corners).
W= Water: A moat, especially one that is wide and deep and filled with water, will serve some of the same functions as a city wall. A moat will slow invaders, who must deal with the water before they can effec¬tively attack the city. It will help the city reg¬ulate who enters and leaves, since people must either cross at designated spots or be good swimmers. Sentries stationed around the moat could watch the people going in and out of the city, being automatically sus¬picious of people choosing to swim rather than walk across at designated points.
In addition, you could choose to populate your water-filled moats for an extra defense by adding alligators, giant pikes, eels, lam preys, gars, quippers, giant crayfish, or 
water snakes. Some moats might be filled with substances other than water, such as long spikes or viscous oil that can be set on fire. Or, a moat could be left empty-just a deep, wide ditch that visitors and enemies must contend with.
Another option for defense is to locate a town or city on an island in a lake or a river. This has the same effect as a water-filled moat, in that people must deal with the water to get to the city, and it also provides a source of fresh water and a foundation for some industries, such as fishing.
FM = Friendly Monster: You should restrict the number of communities that have friendly monsters or friendly crea¬tures as guards so these cities can retain their fantastic nature. However, having a few communities that are guarded by such creatures will add fun to the campaign and could be a source of interaction with the player characters. First, there must be a reason why the creature is helping to pro¬tect the city. Perhaps the city official is a former adventurer who saved the crea¬ture's life, and the monster is expressing its gratitude. Maybe the good-aligned creature or monster likes humankind and does not want any ill to befall this particular commu¬nity. Perhaps there is a joint agreement for protection, with the creature helping to defend the city in exchange for the city's militia agreeing to help defend it and its lair. 
Here are some suggestions for good- aligned creatures or monsters that might serve as effective defenders for a commu¬nity because of their special abilities: dragon (brass, bronze, copper, gold, silver), dragonne, genie, giant (cloud or storm), ki¬rin, lammasu, androsphinx, and treant.
There are many other monsters you could consider, based on the game system you are using. Remember, the friendly mon-ster might not always be obvious. For exam¬ple, a village protected by a few treants might not appear to be guarded at all. How¬ever, people posing a threat to the village's safety could soon find themselves sur¬rounded and entangled by trees. A city could appear to have only a lone sentry on the wall. However, an invading force would quickly learn the "lone sentry's" breath weapon is devastating—an instant after the silver dragon reassumes its natural form. The polymorph ability doesn't need to be innate; in return for some great favor or as a way of expressing their gratitude to the city for some reason, a friendly monster might be willing to subject itself to a spell that causes it to appear human. In most cases, shapechanging or concealing mon-ster guards is probably a good idea, because cities with monster guards that are obvious could soon become the targets of non-good people who equate treasure and power with killing monsters.
You should also consider evil creatures for guarding cities with evil rulers. Such guards could include dragons (especially black, green, and red), bugbears, gargoyles, evil giants, and assorted undead. Again, there are ways to make these monsters, which indeed could be friendly to the city's rulers, seem something other than what they really are.
Even cities with good-aligned rulers might have evil creatures guarding them, if the people in power have a way to control those creatures.
M= Magic: Many possibilities exist for defending a city with magic. If there are mid- to high-level mages, clerics, and illu-sionists in residence, they can be called into action when the city is threatened. Perhaps the leaders have such spell casters in their employ and will routinely have the clerics cast wyvern watch at specified areas out¬side the gates in the evening, or have mages wizard lock a few key gates. Magic mouth spells could warn people away after certain hours. And high-level illusionists casting 
programmed illusions could scare away people after dark.
Golems created by high-level mages and clerics make powerful sentries. An aerial servant conjured by a cleric could keep many enemies at bay.
Magic items are also useful in helping to protect a city. For example, a ring of djinni summoning can bring forth a high-powered protector, a bowl of commanding water ele- mentals can make a city's moat very deadly, and a few ropes of entanglement in the hands of sentries can make short work of enemies. The possibilities are limited only by your imagination.
However, it is important that you regulate the use of magic as a defense. A small village isn't likely to have many (if any) high-level spellcasters to come to its aid. And magic items are not easy to come by; not every town surrounded by a moat will have a bowl of commanding water elementals. For city-design purposes, magic used as a city's method of defense should be treated like friendly monsters: if it isn't used commonly as a defense, it will be considered special and more fun for the players when their characters encounter a community that uses it.
AP = Air Patrol: Air patrols (sometimes a branch of magic defense) can consist of a few sentries periodically taking potions of flying, flying spellcasters, or guards on winged mounts. If a city has several alche¬mists or mages to concoct the mixtures, it might be a common procedure to have sen¬tries imbibe potions of flying and scout the area. Mages in the city's employ might regu¬larly fly invisibly around certain vulnerable locations. In addition, a few specially train¬ed guards might possess rings of flying which aid them in their patrol of the city and surrounding lands; Cities with a budget to afford expensive magic items might place a few guard forces on carpets of flying which can be seen flitting about the city's neighborhoods or hovering above the city's wails.
Flying mounts can be used more often than many magic items and can last longer than fly spells. A city with a stable of pegasi, hippogriffs, griffons, or giant eagles has a formidable air patrol.
Adding a flying patrol can also improve a city's image and make it a place bards sing about and storytellers spin yarns about. It could be an attractive environment for play¬er characters who enjoy the fantastic ele¬ 
ment the city boasts.
Combinations: The most natural com¬bination of defenses is a militia and a city wall, or a militia, a city wall, and a moat. These are things that can be created by nor¬mal people—which make up the bulk of the population of any city. Creating other com¬binations, such as those suggested in the tables, will also work well to defend a city, but the combination should: make sense when the size, location, and governmental nature of the city are taken into consider¬ation.
The PCs' Role: To help make player characters feel like they belong in the com¬munity, they could be called upon to help defend it. Perhaps the PCs are part-time city guards or serve in the militia between adventures. Taking part in the city's defense will help the PCs learn more about the city and your campaign. In addition, scenarios can be built around the problem of defend¬ing the city. If the PCs are mid-level or above, the leader of a city or the NPC in charge of the city's defense could ask them to serve as a special defense force that would take on assignments too tough for normal militiamen. Serving in the militia would also be a source of inner conflict for player characters, and could test their align¬ments. For example, there could be a won¬derfully deep dungeon filled with monsters and treasure that is just waiting to be explored. But it is going to have to wait a lit¬tle longer, since PCs must serve another month in the militia before they can get time off.
