A community is a busy place. There's always work to be done, and usually a shortage of people who are willing and able to perform that work. Whether for a diver¬sion, a challenge, or a way to pick up some cash without risking one's life, player char-acters may decide (or you may decide for them) that getting a job in the city for a while is not a bad idea.
For people as skilled and versatile as the PCs, the possibilities are almost limitless. Joining the city guard, enlisting in the city army, hiring on as bodyguards for impor¬tant and wealthy people or city officials, becoming bouncers for taverns and other establishments, becoming bounty hunters or spies, running for public office or assum¬ing an official position, seeking a simple job in the merchants' quarter or along the docks, and opening a business are among the jobs that adventurers can consider. Some of the opportunities are described in a little more detail below, including sugges¬tions about how to make the jobs interest¬ing for your players and how to turn them into adventures for a campaign.
On Guard!
A job in the city guard will appeal primari¬ly to fighters and clerics, characters who 
typically have good fighting abilities. Thieves who successfully convince city offi¬cials that they are fighters also can find work on the guard force. Mages and illu¬sionists are frequently seen as physically weak and would be encouraged to seek work elsewhere. Most city guards would prefer to hire characters who would wear armor. It is up to you to decide if your city's guard force is an equal-opportunity employ¬er, hiring people of both sexes, or if the guard force is strictly a men-only or a women-only line of work.
The guard force in a town is composed primarily of 0-level and 1st level fighters, with a few higher-level fighters serving as the top-ranking officers. Player character adventurers of any level would be wel¬comed into the guard and probably would be given positions of authority. However, in a city, especially a large one, the guard force would be more experienced. Perhaps noth¬ing less than 1st or 2nd level fighters would be accepted, and guard sergeants would be no lower than 3rd level. A larger city has a greater population to draw from, and there¬fore can be a little more choosy about who is hired to protect the citizens.
Before you allow player characters to join the city guard, you must decide how many people are in the guard and the ranks and numbers of the guard officers. You need to assign levels to the ranks, in part based on the size of the community. For example, in a city, sergeants might be of 3rd and 4th levels, lieutenants 5th and 6th, and captains 7th and 8th.
In a town, the levels of guard officers would generally be lower because there are fewer people to draw from and there would be a smaller guard force.
In a community of any size, you can have a little fun by creating an 8th level fighter who's still only a sergeant or an enlisted man because he has trouble following orders. At the other extreme is the captain who's a measly 3rd level fighter—the son of the commandant, who was given or pro¬moted into a position he's not really capable of holding.
When a player character asks for a posi¬tion on the guard force, you should look at the PC's level and decide what rank to assign the character. However, a 6th level character hoping to be hired as a captain could be in for a surprise. You might want to have the character start out as a sergeant to prove himself. To add a touch of realism, you can list how many men the PC officer is 
in charge of and the amount of time he is expected to work. City officials might be tol¬erant of adventurers, allowing them to work on shifts of three weeks on and three weeks off, to accommodate an adventurer's "need" to make journeys to dungeons and wilderness areas. After all, the city will ben¬efit because the fighter is gaining more experience, sharpening his abilities, and possibly picking up magic items to improve his ability to hold his own in combat.
It is important to establish the guard force's duties, which probably would con¬sist mainly of patrolling the city and arrest-ing lawbreakers. If a city has an adventurers quarter, the guard officials might station PC guards there, believing that adventurers can deal better with other adventurers than city-bred guards who lack the same life experiences.
You should award PC guards money and experience for their accomplishments and should promote PCs within the ranks as they rise in levels and perform well for the city. Guard work is an adventure in itself, and should bring rewards accordingly.
Concocting adventures that are related to a PC's stint on guard duty will give you more opportunities to use the street layouts and fold-up buildings that come with this product. The PC guards could be charged with stopping a riot in the merchants quar¬ter, catching a notorious cat burglar, halting a ring of pickpockets, posing as victims to snare a band of thieves and muggers, or investigating a counterfeiting racket. In addition, player character guards could pick up a myriad of rumors while on their beats, learning about newly discovered dungeons or unearthed ruins from adven¬turers they meet.
Working on the city guard will also give PCs a chance to travel throughout the city, learning about all the neighborhoods and the people who live there. It is a perfect opportunity for you to show off your crea¬tion.
They’Re )N Ihe ARmy Now
Serving in a city's militia is in some respects similar to being in the city guard. PCs could be assigned ranks based on their levels. However, unlike in the guard, wiz¬ards would be sought after. Military leaders recognize that a well-cast fireball can do much more damage than a squadron of low- 
level fighters. You could choose to have the military pay spellc asters more than ordi¬nary soldiers. But it would be unlikely that wizards would be named as officers. Fight¬ers, most military officials would agree, have the best military minds and can plan the most successful strategies. Thieves might be welcomed into some armies if they agree to perform spying missions. And cler¬ics would be in great demand because of their ability to heal the wounded. The army is a place where an entire adventuring par¬ty could find work.
How busy an army is —and the player characters enlisted in it—will depend on the city's relationship with nearby tribes and communities. An army in peacetime is more likely to grant the PCs leaves so they can 
adventure. However, the adventuring likely will have to be short-term, since most fur¬loughs might be for only a week or two.
Army duty is a continuous source of adventures and could keep the PCs so busy they will not have time to look for a dungeon. An army, or portions of it, could be called upon to help the city guard when disasters such as tornadoes, floods, and massive fires strike. in addition, members of the army could also be called upon to stop riots, to protect city officials, or to serve as added protection during festivals and cele¬brations.
Player characters can be encouraged to take an active part in a city's army by being made responsible for drawing up defense plans and determining how troops will be 
deployed if the city comes under attack. If a city is located next to an ocean or a large riv¬er, the PCs could be expected to develop water-based defense plans.
If the city is aggressive and wants to use its army to wipe out tribes of monsters lair¬ing nearby, the PCs would be called upon to develop attack strategies and may be asked to lead an advance force to learn the strength of the monsters. If the city learns that a neighboring city is planning a war, the PCs could be charged with helping to direct an attack against that city—taking the war to the enemy to prevent the PCs' home city from being damaged and innocent citi¬zens from being killed. The player charac¬ters also could be assigned spying missions to neighboring cities. Or they could be 
asked to patrol the area surrounding the city, where they might find an adventure or two to undertake.
Being Bodyguards
This is another opportunity for the prayer characters to find work as a group. Wealthy merchants, rich landowners, and powerful city officials all need protection — or think they need protection. Some of these people have accumulated enemies through the years: people they have put out of business because of shrewd mercantile maneuvers, former landowners who have had their property absorbed, and former officials who were ousted from office or defeated in elections. The PCs could be asked to accom¬pany these high-powered NPCs as they trav¬el through the city or journey to other cities.
The job will provide rich role-playing opportunities, as the PCs will have to deal with haughty NPCs who are used to being waited on, greedy merchants who only care about making money, or political officials whom they might not see eye to eye with. It could test the PCs' loyalty to their employ¬ers. However, not all high-powered NPCs should have major character flaws. Some of them should be easy to get along with, and be people with whom the PCs could easily sympathize.
Adventure possibilities include protecting a political official from assassination attempts; accompanying a wealthy mer-chant who is traveling with a cargo of pre¬cious gems and other valuables; setting up defenses for a wealthy landowner who has been receiving threats from an unknown party; guarding the city's museum, which is filled with temptations for thieves; or escorting a nobleman's son to a wedding with another nobleman's daughter in a nearby city.
As with a city guard position, being a bodyguard will allow a PC to explore many sections of the city and will let you show off some of the work you have put into creating the city.
Bouncers and Strongarms
Although this is a viable form of employ¬ment for player character adventurers, especially fighters, there are fewer kinds of scenario possibilities you can develop. How¬ 
ever, the job is not without merit. It will be an avenue for you to use some of the build¬ings in this product and stage elaborate bar¬room brawls that will test PCs' abilities to subdue NPCs without killing them. You can create chase scenes that will have the PCs running after culprits through the twisting and turning streets of the city, over roof¬tops, and perhaps through dark and dan¬gerous alleys.
It is likely that only strong-looking fight¬ers will be employed bouncers for tav¬erns and other establishments in the city, with the wages being dependent upon how well-to-do or busy the establishment is. And it is not likely that the entire party of adven¬turers can work as bouncers at the same establishment. However, while there are drawbacks to this type of work, there are a few advantages. PCs working as bouncers in the adventurers quarter could learn about dungeons, monsters lairs, pirates' plans to attack the city, or thieves discussing what establishments to rob.
Bounty Hunters and
Spies
These professions could be used for adventures in and out of the city. PCs of any class, race, or sex could become bounty hunters or spies, working for city officials, merchants, or themselves.
As bounty hunters the, PCs could stalk the city streets or the area around the city, look¬ing for NPC villains with prices on their heads. This could pit the PCs against power¬ful and cunning NPCs you have developed and could take the PCs almost anywhere you desire —in the sewers under the city streets, through the various neighborhoods of the city, and through the environs sur¬rounding the city, testing their investigative and combat abilities. Player characters could come up with a considerable amount of treasure this way, or could end up losing out if their targets are more powerful than they are. They could even gain fame and fortune in the city. Of course, you always can add a few twists, such as the PCs' target being framed by the people who hired the PCs to catch him.
Spying assignments can also take the play¬er characters to a variety of places and will test their ability to be stealthy information gatherers, rather than hack-and-slash adventurers who swing first and ask ques¬tions later. And they will allow you to care¬ 
fully lay out encounters involving the streets and fold-up buildings.
Spy work in itself is an adventure, and has the potential to lead the characters into a string of further adventures as they uncov¬er more and more information. Perhaps the PCs will uncover the location of a major thieves' guild; will learn about a plot to over¬throw the government; will discover that counterfeit coins are being released in the city in an attempt to ruin the economy; or will discover that a band of evil adventurers is bringing monsters into the city through the sewer system and plans to use them to threaten merchants into paying protection money.
Spying is yet another profession which will help the PCs learn about your cities and the colorful NPCs who reside there. It can also put the PCs in peril as they accumulate enemies who might pursue them in adven¬tures in the future.
Getting into Office
Politics is a line of work that could appeal to any player character, regardless of class, race, or sex —although in some fantasy cam¬paigns it may be difficult for a woman or a demihuman to rise to a position of power in a human community. How player charac¬ters become involved in the government of a city or town will depend largely on the form of government you have established. For example, if a community is run by a dic¬tator, the only way the PCs could get into power is to make good friends with the dic¬tator and be appointed to a position, or to overthrow him and take a position by force. On the other hand, a democracy opens the door to all sorts of possibilities. In any case, three main factors have a bearing on how successful a PC might be as a leader or poli¬tician; these are discussed below.
Size of the Community: PCs wanting a position of power probably will have better luck obtaining it in smaller communities, where there are not as many adventurers and where they will be deemed as more important people. It will be easier for PCs to impress a community of 500 than one of 5,000. And if the community's residents are taken with the PCs, they may even ask the characters to lead them.
Race: Although many NPCs in fantasy campaigns are race-blind, communities as a whole are not. A half-elf seeking an appoint- 
ment as a city official may not be well received in a town composed primarily of humans. However, the half-elf would have a better chance of getting the position than a full elf, dwarf, halfling, or gnome. Of course, if the appointment is being made by the city's chief official, and the PC is in good favor with that official, race might have lit¬tle impact.
Charisma: Politicians and officials tend to be charismatic. They have a way with words and can turn a phrase to get the pub¬lic behind them or to get the public not to suspect them of wrongdoing. The public is drawn to charismatic people; they like to hear them talk, they like to watch them in action, and they tend to support a charis¬matic person over a mousy individual who doesn't present himself well. Obviously, a player character with a Charisma score of 16 should have a better chance of being elected or appointed to a position than a player character with a score of 6. It only makes sense to have a better-received or better-liked PC in a position of power than a PC who repulses a portion of the popula¬tion.
Being the Top Dog: There are numer¬ous ways for player characters to be appointed as lesser city officials or to be put in charge of a city guild or the city guard or army. Winning favor with the present lead¬er or leaders is one of the best avenues. However, there may come a time when some of the player characters who have been involved with the city campaign for a while want a major position of power or want to become the city leader. How this will occur will depend almost exclusively on the type of government in place. For exam¬ple, player characters will not be able to be in charge of a city with a monarchy unless they are related to the royal family or for some reason depose the monarch. PCs in a city with a tyrannical despot might be tempted to overthrow the government for the betterment of themselves and the rest of the residents, putting themselves in charge. In a militocracy, they might want to take over the government for similar rea¬sons. However, in a democracy or a repub¬lic, they should have to campaign for a position, selling themselves to the people eli¬gible to vote. All of these possibilities will provide adventures for the PCs. And many city adventures will abound once they are in office, as they must deal with some of the 
extraordinary and fantastic confrontations facing the city.
However, once PCs come into power — something you might want to reserve for higher-level PCs — they will find their life-styles drastically, and perhaps unfortu¬nately, changed. Player characters who are lesser officials in a city or town government should still have plenty of time on their hands to adventure. Even PCs who are in charge of the city guilds, the guard force, or the army will be able to get away for a time, putting their next in command in charge in their absence. But PCs who are on top in the political structure will find their time taken up with city problems and concerns. They might be able to adventure once in a while, but not often. Some players could find that putting one of their characters into a supreme position of power is a good way to retire that character.
Setting up Shop
Becoming merchants might appeal to player characters who want to add a little financial security to their lives, establish a permanent place of residence, and have a place to sell all the treasure they have been accumulating on trips to the dungeon.
Setting up shop as a merchant can be as much fun as building a castle, since players have to determine how large a building they want, what they want to sell, and how many employees their characters will need to hire to watch the shop so the characters can still adventure. This may be one of the most con¬venient forms of employment in a city, because a merchant could set his own hours and close down the shop if he is away adventuring for an extended period of time.
Of course, this form of employment also will take a little extra work on your part, as you will have to determine how much to charge the player character for construc¬tion of a building, or how much rent to charge him for occupying an existing struc-ture; how much to assess him for the busi¬ness's operating costs, including the cost for hired help; and how much money he brings in monthly or annually from the goods he sells. Income will be tied to the goods sold. For example, a player character opening a bakery is not going to make as much as a player character opening a weapons shop that features a few magic items and baubles found on adventures. Some player charac¬ters could choose to open businesses based on their nonweapon proficiencies such as 
gem cutting, carpentry, weaving, pottery making, and so forth. This would give the PCs a chance to use their non-fighting related skills.
Many adventures can spring from PC- owned businesses. For example, the player characters could be faced with a gang of thieves demanding protection money; could have to deal with belligerent customers who are not quite human, or could have to confront a ring of thieves bothering the merchants in a district.
Menial Labor and Odd Jobs
Some player characters might opt for manual labor, such as loading ships on the docks, loading and unloading merchant wagons, and hiring on construction crews. Or they might choose to seek part-time employment as clerks or private guards in the merchants quarter. These jobs are not as exciting as the others described in this section, and they will not yield the PCs much money. But they will serve to occupy PCs between adventures and can be used as a vehicle for claiming that some characters are occupied when those PCs' players are not able to attend a gaming session.
Still, if you're clever you can create adven¬tures for these PCs in their mundane jobs. For example, player characters working on the docks could get pressed or kidnapped into labor on a ship, setting them up for high-seas adventures. Or, PCs working in shops in the merchants quarters could save the day when thieves and ruffians attempt to ruin the business.
Many other avenues for PC employment exist in a city, and will depend in part on the size of the city and the businesses and adventures you have planned. Some player characters could become so involved in their jobs that (for a time, at least) they will not want to look for adventure elsewhere.
