One of the most difficult tasks that you will face when running city adventures is keeping a party of player character adven¬turers together — or, failing that, handling the play session during times when the PCs have separated. Frequently when a group of player characters descends upon a town, the temptation is great for them to split up. Each character wants to go his own way for a while, taking care of shopping and what¬ever other kind of "town business" needs to be done.
There's nothing wrong with this from the standpoint of realism or practicality, but obviously a fragmented party can be very taxing for a DM. When a split occurs, you may be obliged to take turns dealing with each splinter group while the other players sit around the table and get bored or carry on a conversation, distracting you and the player(s) you are trying to pay attention to at the moment. It may be difficult for you to spend an equal amount of time with each player, which can cause hard feelings.
There are several ways to address the split-group situation. You can try to keep it from happening, or you can make the best of it and try to give each PC or small group of PCs the freedom they want without inconveniencing other players.
If PCs want to split up but you don't think that the tactic is necessary or desirable, you can try to contrive some situation that will gently force them to stay together or rejoin into a group if they have already separated. Solitary adventurers would be more prone to muggings and robbery attempts than PCs traveling in a group. Merchants might charge exorbitant prices to adventurers who go shopping by themselves, but offer a lower "group rate" when everyone in a par¬ty comes into the store at the same time. Without being too blatant about it, you might be able to plunge the party into a threatening or tension-filled situation right after they come through the gates, so that their natural inclination would be to stay together in case real trouble breaks out.
If PCs insist on going their separate ways and you don't really want to deny them the opportunity to do some looking around on their own, then you have to address your players and get them to understand and agree to some ground rules. Explain to them that it will take some time for you to deal with each of their characters individually, and that anyone who isn't in the action at a given time should still pay attention to what's going on —so that they can learn 
from the other player's experience, and none of the players will have to waste time later recounting what happened to his char-acter while the group was split up.
For the utmost in realism, you can allow players to take their characters on solitary jaunts through the city, and conduct each session away from the sight and hearing of other players. Explain to the players that if they really want to go off on their own, then you're willing to accommodate them — but what that means is that any player not pres¬ently involved in the action will have to leave the room. No one will be allowed to know what has happened to his comrades' characters until those characters reunite and relate to each other what they've expe¬rienced in the meantime. This is the price they'll have to pay for splitting up. By going off separately, they'll be able to explore a lot more of the city in the same amount of game time than if they had all traveled together — but the tradeoff is that some of them might overlook clues or special fea¬tures that other players' characters would have noticed if they had been moving as a group. And all the players will have to 
spend time later relating to each other what their characters discovered and learned while they were on their own. If you explain to the players ahead of time that this is what they can expect, then they will have no reasonable cause to complain if each of them is only involved in a fraction of the playing session during which all of their exploration, shopping, and other solitary activities are taking place.
In short, a split party doesn't have to be a problem, as long as each player under-stands that along with freedom comes responsibility. You'll have to be willing to put up with handling each PC or small group of PCs separately for as long as they decide to stay apart, but chances are that the players will soon tire of being lone wolves and will want to get back into a large group—because, as you and they all know, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
