# New Armor Types

Armor Cost Armor Class \(AC\) Strength Stealth Weight Buckler 5 gp +1 - - 4 lb Tower Shield 30 gp +3 Str 13 Disadvantage 40 lb

**Buckler**: This small shield is fitted around the arm and made of metal, wood, or boiled leather. It takes the same time to don and doff as a normal shield \(1 action\) and a character cannot benefit from a buckler and any other type of shield at the same time. Unlike a shield, a character can still use the hand in which the buckler is equipped. If during a character's turn they use an item with this hand, attack with a weapon in this hand, or attack with a two-handed weapon, then the character does not gain the buckler's bonus to AC until the start of their next turn. Attacking with a one-handed weapon or thrown weapon using the buckler hand causes disadvantage on the attack roll. The hand wielding the buckler does not count as a free hand for the purposes of spellcasting, grappling, or unarmed attacks. A character proficient with shields is also considered proficient with bucklers. A buckler does not benefit from the rules or abilities that specifically refer to shields, such as the Protection Fighting Style or the Shield Master feat.

**Tower Shield**: A huge metal-reinforced shield nearly as tall as its wielder. Donning and doffing the tower shield takes 1 action. A character cannot benefit from a tower shield and any other type of shield at the same time. While a tower shield is equipped, its bearer takes disadvantage on all attack rolls due to the off-balancing encumbrance of the shield, unless the weapon has the Light property. A character proficient with both shields and heavy armor is assumed to be proficient with tower shields. All other rules that affect shields still apply to tower shields.

